Alfredo Di Stefano is among the high profile players to have changed their nationalitiesThe practice of professional footballers changing their nationality (in most cases from their nation of birth) to play international football has been in action for many decades now.
For example, the legendary Alfredo Di Stefano played six times for Argentina, his nation of birth, before representing his adopted nation, Spain, 31 times. He was able to play for Spain after he acquired Spanish citizenship even though he had already represented Argentina in official games.
But according to current FIFA rules, such a change can happen only if the player has not represented any country in their senior team’s official matches.
Another famous example is that of former Barcelona player Deco, who was Brazilian by birth but acquired Portuguese citizenship following six years of stay in the country. Interestingly his first game for Portugal was against Brazil when he came on as a substitute and scored the winner.
There are other cases where players represented the country of their origin even though they held the passport of another country and had played for that country’s youth teams. A perfect example is the case of Borussia Dortmund defender Neven Subotic.
Honourable Mentions: Marcos Senna (Brazil to Spain) and Marko Marin (Bosnia and Herzegovina to Germany)
Chelsea’s Diego Costa is a Brazilian by birth, but the forward was called up only once for the senior team. Since Brazil were the World Cup hosts in 2014, they didn’t have to play any qualifying matches, which meant that when other countries were participating in qualifying matches, they were playing friendlies. Therefore, when Costa represented Brazil twice, both were in friendlies.
This meant that Costa was eligible to represent Spain once he acquired a Spanish passport as he had not played in official FIFA games for Brazil. Costa acquired Spanish Citizenship in 2013 after living in Spain for over six years while plying his trade there.
Following this, the Spanish Football Federation made a request to FIFA to allow Costa to represent Spain and, once the player sent a request to the Brazil Football Federation, the then Brazil manager, Luiz Felipe Scolari, said that Costa was turning his back on his nation.
In February 2014, Costa represented Spain’s national team for the first time. Losing Costa to Spain was a big blow for Brazil as there is no doubt about his ability as a striker and his position is one where Brazil are currently in need of a good player.
