Jump to navigation
Speak Now
France will take on Croatia in the World Cup 2018 final on Sunday.
The European nation are aiming to win their second world title but a squad that consists of lot of players of African origins that player will also be proud represent that the African continent in the final.
"It has always been the case that the French team has always had players from Africa and from other countries and territories, and not just in football but in other sports," France coach Didier Deschamps said ahead of the final.
"They are all French and they are all proud to be French but through their origins, through their childhood, they have friends, they have families in these countries so they have a certain attachment to these countries and a certain pride that these people will see them play in a World Cup Final."
WORLD CUP 2018 FINAL, FRANCE vs CROATIA: LIVE UPDATES
14 players of the 23-member France squad are of African origin including stars like Paul Pogba and Kylian Mbappe.
2018 FIFA WORLD CUP: FULL COVERAGE
Meanwhile, France captain Hugo Lloris has said that team has shut out all the euphoria back home over their run to the World Cup final in order to play a perfect match against Croatia on Sunday.
The goalkeeper said the team were not being swept up by the wave of celebrations back home and were keeping their focus firmly on their shot of earning a second World Cup title after 1998 when they take on the Croatians in Moscow's Luzhniki Stadium.
"To be honest we are in our little bubble and we don't know what is happening in France," Lloris told reporters on Saturday.
Also read - France vs Croatia, World Cup 2018 final prediction: Buyan the bear has a winner
"We are far from thinking that we have reached our goal. We will face a high-quality opponent and they deserve as much credit as we do.
"They have displayed their physical and mental strengths and tomorrow we will need a great French team to win."
France have never needed to go beyond 90 minutes in their run to the final after beating Argentina in the round of 16, Uruguay in the last eight and Belgium in the semi-finals.
But Croatia had to battle from a goal down in all three of their knockout matches to beat Denmark, Russia and England.
Also read - World Cup 2018: France's road to the final
They played extra time in all of them and needed penalties against the Danes and hosts Russia.
"Croatia have shown their mental strength which is quite incredible. They have managed to qualify after extra time three times in a row. There is something special in this team," Lloris warned.
"They also have an incredible collective strength. We have a lot of respect for them. We need to perform at a high level and deliver a perfect match to win," said the keeper.
Also read - World Cup 2018: Croatia's road to the final
France are in their third World Cup final after winning in 1998 and losing to Italy in 2006. They also reached the Euro final on home soil two years ago only to lose to Portugal.
Lloris said that defeat was not on their minds any longer, with many current players not part of the 2016 team.
"I think that our team is quite calm. I do not really know if we realise how far we have come but it is better that way," Lloris said. "We have this inner strength from the beginning of the tournament with which we can overcome any challenge."
"Tomorrow will be the most important match of our career. It will be a special match because it is a World Cup final and we have to stay in our bubble to focus on the ultimate goal."
(With Reuters inputs)
Explained: What are e-cigarettes? Why did the govt ban them?
Nuke threat over Kashmir: Imran Khan unmasked by his own minister
Saudi oil facility attacked; what makes drone attacks so dangerous | Explained
Worried about hiked traffic fines? See these numbers and you may start liking them
Babul Supriyo heckled at Jadavpur University in Kolkata
It's atrocious, unbelievable and unacceptable: Ghulam Nabi Azad on Farooq Abdullah's detention under PSA
Image of the day: Leopard, who accidentally fell into a well, rescued
So Sorry: Traffic jurmana zaroori hai
There is a possibility of war between India & Pak: Imran Khan's nuclear threat
EC announces Haryana, Maharashtra Assembly poll schedule
India Today Conclave 2019: Murali Doraiswamy on discoveries about human brain
Conclave 2019: Devendra Fadnavis on Maharashtra elections, alliance with Shiv Sena, more
Copyright © 2019 Living Media India Limited. For reprint rights: Syndications Today
Copyright © 2019 Living Media India Limited. For reprint rights: Syndications Today
